 Critical Systems
Cybersecurity Controls
 )CSCC – 1 : 2019 (
Sharing Indicator: White  
Document Classification: Open


Disclaimer: The following controls will be 
governed by and implemented in accordance 
with the laws of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
and must be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction 
of the courts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
Therefore, the Arabic version will be the binding 
language for all matters relating to the meaning 
or interpretation of this document.

In the Name of Allah,
 The Most Gracious, 
The Most Merciful
6
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteTraffic Light Protocol (TLP):
This marking protocol is widely used around the world. It has four colors (traffic lights):
   Red – Personal, Confidential and for Intended Recipient Only
The recipient has no rights to share information classified in red with any person outside 
the defined range of recipients either inside or outside the organization.
  Amber – Restricted Sharing
The recipient may share information classified in amber only with intended recipients 
inside the organization and with recipients who are required to take action related to the 
shared information.
   Green – Sharing within the Same Community 
The recipient may share information classified in green with other recipients inside the
organization or outside it within the same sector or related to the organization. However, 
it is not allowed to exchange or publish this information on public channels.
   White - No Restrictions
7
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  White
8
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteTable of Contents
Executive Summary 10
Introduction 12
Objectives 13
Definition and Identification Criteria of Critical Systems  14
Components of Critical Systems  15
Scope of Work and Applicability 16
Implementation and Compliance 17
Update and Review 17
CSCC Domains and Structure  18
Critical Systems Cybersecurity Controls (CSCC) 20
1- Cybersecurity Governance 20
2- Cybersecurity Defense 22
3- Cybersecurity Resilience 28
4- Third-Party and Cloud Computing Cybersecurity 29
Appendices  30
Appendix (A): Relationship between CSCC and ECC  30
Appendix (B): Terms and Definitions 32
Appendix (C): List of Abbreviations 34
List of the Tables
Table (1):  CSCC Structure 19
Table (2):  Terms and Definitions 32
Table (3):  List of Abbreviations 34
List of the Figures and Illustrations
Figure (1): CSCC Main Domains and Subdomains 18
Figure (2): Controls Coding Scheme 19
Figure (3): CSCC Structure 19
Figure (4): Guide to Colors of Subdomains in Figure 5 30
Figure (5): ECC and CSCC Subdomains 31
9
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  White
10
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteExecutive Summary
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 aims for a comprehensive improvement of 
the nation and its security, economy and citizens’ well-being. One of the essential goals of 
Vision 2030 is the continued transformation towards digitalization and the improvement 
of its infrastructure in order to keep up with the accelerated global progress in digital 
services, renewable global networks, IT/ OT systems and artificial intelligence and 4th 
industrial revolution transformations. 
This transformation requires supporting the ease of information flow, securing that 
information and preserving the integrity of all systems. It also requires maintaining 
and supporting the cybersecurity of the Kingdom in order to protect its vital interests, 
national security, critical infrastructures, high priority sectors and governmental services 
and practices. To accomplish this objective, the National Cybersecurity Authority (NCA) 
was established, and its mandate was approved as per the Royal Decree number 6801, 
dated 11/2/1439H making it the national and specialized reference for matters related to 
cybersecurity in the Kingdom. 
NCA ’s mandate and duties fulfill the strategic and regulatory cybersecurity needs related 
to the development and issuance of cybersecurity national policies, governance mechanisms, 
frameworks, standards, controls and guidelines. 
NCA ’s mandate also fulfill the need to continuously monitor the organizations' compliance 
as the importance of cybersecurity has significantly increased more than ever with the rise of 
security risks in the cyberspace.  
NCA ’s mandate states that its responsibility for cybersecurity does not absolve any 
government or private organization from its own cybersecurity responsibilities as confirmed 
by the Royal Decree number 57231, dated 10/11/1439H, which states that “all government 
organizations must improve their cybersecurity level to protect their networks, systems and 
data, and comply with NCA ’s policies, frameworks, standards, controls and guidelines” and 
what the Royal Decree number 7732, dated 12/2/1440H has also confirmed.
From this perspective, NCA developed the Critical Systems Cybersecurity Controls 
(CSCC - 1 : 2019) to set the minimum cybersecurity requirements for critical systems in 
all organizations, in addition to the Essential Cybersecurity Controls (ECC - 1 : 2018). This 
document highlights the details of CSCC controls, goals, scope, statement of applicability, 
compliance and monitoring. 
11
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteAll organizations that own or operate critical systems must implement all necessary 
measures to ensure continuous compliance with the CSCC as per item 3 of article 10 of 
NCA ’s mandate and as per the Royal Decree number 57231, dated 10/11/1439H, also as per 
the Royal Decree number 7732, dated 12/2/1440H.
12
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteIntroduction
The National Cybersecurity Authority (referred to in this document as "NCA") 
developed the Essential Cybersecurity Controls (ECC - 1 : 2018) to set the minimum 
cybersecurity requirements for organizations. As an extension and a complement  to ECC, 
the Critical Systems Cybersecurity Controls (CSCC - 1 : 2019) was developed to fit the 
cybersecurity needs for national critical systems. 
The CSCC was developed after conducting a comprehensive study of multiple national 
and international cybersecurity frameworks and standards, studying related national 
decisions, law and regulatory requirements, reviewing and leveraging cybersecurity best 
practices, analyzing previous cybersecurity incidents and attacks on government and other 
critical organizations, and conducting public consultations. 
During the development of these controls, NCA considered the alignment between 
CSCC and ECC (which is a prerequisite for compliance with CSCC). The organizations 
must continuously comply with ECC in order to be fully compliant with the CSCC. for 
that, the CSCC consists of the following:
• 4 Main Domains 
• 21 Subdomains 
• 32 Main Controls 
• 73 Subcontrols
13
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteObjectives
As an extension to ECC, the CSCC aims to enable organizations and build their protection 
and cyber resilience capabilities against cyber attacks, and sustain information technology 
assets for critical systems. The CSCC was developed based on international standards and best 
practices in order to meet the current security needs and raise organizations' preparedness to 
face the growing cybersecurity risks against their critical systems that may result in negative 
impacts and significant losses on the national level. 
14
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteDefinition and Identification Criteria of Critical Systems 
Critical Systems Definition
Any system or network whose failure, unauthorized change to its operation, unauthorized 
access to it, or to the data stored or processed by it; may result in negative impact on the 
organization’s businesses and services’ availability, or cause negative economic, financial, 
security or social impacts on the national level.
Critical Systems Identification Criteria 
The following are the criteria that may be used by organizations to identify critical systems 
they own:
1. Negative impact on national security.
2. Negative impact on the Kingdom’s reputation and public image.
3. Significant financial losses (i.e., more than 0.01% of GDP). 
4. Negative impact on the services provided to a large number of users (i.e., more 
        than 5% of the population) 
5. Loss of lives. 
6. Unauthorized disclosure of data that is classified as Top Secret or Secret. 
7. Negative impact on the operations of one (or more) vital sector(s). 
15
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteComponents of Critical Systems
Below is the list of critical systems' components (1 through 8 are the technical components):
1. Network, for example:
1.1. Connecting devices, such as:
• Router.
• Switches.
• Gateways. 
1.2 Firewall. 
1.3 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS). 
1.4 Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) protection devices. 
2. Databases. 
3. Storage Assets. 
4. Middleware. 
5. Servers and Operating Systems. 
6. Applications. 
7. Encryption Devices. 
8. Critical systems’ peripherals, (e.g., printers and scanners).
9. Individuals working in critical systems’ supporting roles (e.g., users, technical staff 
          with significant and sensitive privileges, operators and service providers).
10. Documents related to the components above.
16
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteScope of Work and Applicability
CSCC Scope of Work 
These controls are applicable to systems deemed critical (as per the criteria forementioned 
in this document) by the organizations who own or operate these systems, whether they 
are government organizations in the kingdom or abroad (e.g., ministries, authorities, 
establishments, embassies and others), subsidiaries of government or private organizations, 
which are all referred to herein as “Organization” . 
CSCC Statement of Applicability 
Every organization must comply with all applicable controls after assessing the extent of 
impact and conducting necessary checks before implementation. Some controls' applicability 
differs from one organization to another, for example:
• Controls in Subdomain 4-2 (Cloud Computing and Hosting Cybersecurity) are 
applicable and must be implemented by organizations currently using or planning to use 
cloud computing and hosting services. 
17
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteImplementation and Compliance
In order to comply with item 3 of article 10 of NCA ’s mandate, and as per the Royal 
Decree number 57231, dated 10/11/1439H, and the Royal Decree number 7732, dated 
12/2/1440H, all organizations within the scope of the CSCC must:
1. Identify the organization's critical systems using (Critical Systems Identification 
     Criteria).
2. Implement all necessary measures to comply with these controls on the identified 
  critical systems within the compliance period defined by NCA, provided that 
   cybersecurity risks are assessed and managed to minimize potential risks during 
    the defined compliance period. 
3. Ensure the continuous compliance after the defined compliance period.
NCA evaluates the organizations' compliance with the CSCC through multiple means 
such as self-assessments by the organizations themselves, and/or on-site audits, in 
accordance with the mechanisms deemed appropriate by the NCA.
Update and Review
NCA will periodically review and update the CSCC as per the related industry cybersecurity 
updates. NCA will communicate and publish the updated version of CSCC for implementation 
and compliance.
18
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteCSCC Domains and Structure
Main Domains and Subdomains
Figure (1) below shows the main domains and subdomains of CSCC. Appendix (A) shows 
relationship between the CSCC and ECC.
Cybersecurity Risk 
Management1-2 Cybersecurity Strategy 1-1
1- Cybersecurity
Governance Periodical Cybersecurity 
Review and Audit1-4Cybersecurity in Information Technology 
Project Management1-3
Cybersecurity in Human Resources 1-5
Identity and Access 
Management2-2 Asset Management 2-1
2- Cybersecurity 
DefenseNetworks Security 
Management2-4Information System and Information 
Processing Facilities Protection2-3
Data and Information 
Protection2-6 Mobile Devices Security 2-5
Backup and Recovery 
Management2-8 Cryptography 2-7
Penetration Testing 2-10 Vulnerabilities Management 2-9
Web Application Security 2-12Cybersecurity Event Logs and 
Monitoring Management2-11
Application Security 2-13
Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management (BCM) 3-13- Cybersecurity
Resilience
Cloud Computing and 
Hosting Cybersecurity4-2 Third-Party Cybersecurity 4-14- Third-Party and 
Cloud Computing
Cybersecurity
Figure (1): CSCC Main Domains and Subdomains
19
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteStructure
Figures (2) and (3) below show the scheme and structure of CSCC codes.
Figure 2. Controls Coding Scheme
Figure 3. CSCC Structure
Please note that the green colored numbers (such as:  1-8-1 ), are reference numbers to 
related ECC subdomain or control.
Table (1) below shows the structure of the controls.
Table 1. CSCC Structure
Name of Main Domain
Reference Number of the Main Domain
Reference No. of the Subdomain Name of the Subdomain
Objective
Controls
Control Reference Number Control Clauses 1Critical Systems Cybersecurity Controls
20
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls (CSCC)
Details of the Critical Systems Cybersecurity Controls (CSCC)
1    Cybersecurity Governance
Cybersecurity Strategy 1-1
To ensure that cybersecurity plans, goals, initiatives and projects are contributing to compliance 
with related laws and regulations. Objective
Controls
In addition to the controls in ECC subdomain 1-1, the organization’s cybersecurity strategy 
must prioritize the support of protecting its critical systems.1-1-1
Cybersecurity Risk Management 1-2
To ensure managing cybersecurity risks in a methodological approach in order to protect 
the organization’s information technology assets as per the organizational policies and 
procedures and related laws and regulations.Objective
Controls
In addition to the controls in ECC subdomain  1-5, cybersecurity risk management 
methodology must include at least the following:
Conducting a cybersecurity risk assessment on critical systems at least once annually. 1-2-1-1
Creating a cybersecurity risk register for critical systems, and reviewing it at least 
once every month.1-2-1-21-2-1
Cybersecurity in Information Technology Project Management 1-3
To ensure that cybersecurity requirements are included in project management methodology 
and procedures in order to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information 
technology assets as per organization policies, and procedures, and related laws and regulations.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 1-6-2 , cybersecurity requirements of project 
management and asset (information technology) change management of the organization’s 
critical systems must include at least the following:
Conducting a stress test to ensure the capacity of the various components. 1-3-1-1
Ensuring the implementation of business continuity requirements. 1-3-1-21-3-1
21
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteIn addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 1-6-3 , cybersecurity requirements related to 
software and application development projects of the organization’s critical systems must 
include at least the following:
Conducting a security source code review before the critical system release. 1-3-2-1
Securing the access, storage, documentation and releases of source code. 1-3-2-2
Securing the authenticated Application Programming Interface (API). 1-3-2-3
Secure and trusted migration of applications from testing environments to 
production environments, along with deletion of any data, IDs or passwords 
related to the testing environment before the migration.1-3-2-4   1-3-2
 Periodical Cybersecurity Review and Audit 1-4
To ensure that cybersecurity controls are implemented and in compliance with organizational 
policies and procedures, as well as related national and international laws, regulations and 
agreements.Objective
Controls
With reference to ECC control 1-8-1 , the organization’s cybersecurity function must review 
the implementation of CSCC at least once annually. 1-4-1
With reference to ECC control 1-8-2 , the implementation of CSCC must be reviewed by 
independent parties within the organization, outside the cybersecurity function at least once 
every three years.1-4-2
Cybersecurity in Human Resources 1-5
To ensure that cybersecurity risks and requirements related to personnel (employees and 
contractors) are managed efficiently prior to employment, during employment and after 
termination/separation as per organizational policies and procedures, and related laws 
and regulations.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 1-9-3 , personnel cybersecurity requirements 
prior to employment must include at least the following: 
Screening or vetting candidates for working on critical systems. 1-5-1-1
The technical support and development positions for critical systems, must be 
filled with experienced Saudi professionals.1-5-1-21-5-1
 
22
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  White                              Cybersecurity Defense
Asset Management 2-1
To ensure that the organization has an accurate and detailed inventory of information 
technology assets in order to support the organization’s cybersecurity and operational 
requirements to maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information 
technical assets.Objective
Controls
In addition to the controls in ECC subdomain 2-1, cybersecurity requirements for 
managing information technology assets must include at least the following:
Maintaining an annually-updated inventory of critical systems’ assets.  2-1-1-1
Identifying assets owners and involving them in the asset management lifecycle 
for critical systems.2-1-1-22-1-1
 Identity and Access Management 2-2
To ensure the secure and restricted logical access to information technology assets in order to 
prevent unauthorized access and allow only authorized access for users which are necessary 
to accomplish assigned tasks.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control  2-2-3 , cybersecurity requirements for identity 
and access management of critical systems must include at least the following: 
Prohibiting remote access from outside the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 2-2-1-1
Restricting remote access from inside the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and verifying 
each access attempt by the organization’s security operations center, and 
continuously monitoring activities related to remote access. 2-2-1-2
Using multi-factor authentication for all users. 2-2-1-3
Using multi-factor authentication for privileged users, and on systems utilized 
for managing critical systems stated in control 2-3-1-4.2-2-1-4
Developing and implementing a high-standard and secure password policy. 2-2-1-5
Utilizing secure methods and algorithms for storing and processing passwords, 
such as: Hashing functions.2-2-1-6
Securely managing service accounts for applications and systems, and disabling 
interactive login from these accounts. 2-2-1-7
Prohibiting direct access and interaction with databases for all users except 
for database administrators. Users' access and interaction with databases 
must be through applications only, with consideration given to applying security  
solutions that limit or prohibit visibility of classified data to database 
administrators. 2-2-1-82-2-12
23
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteWith reference to ECC subcontrol 2-2-3-5 , user identities and access rights to critical 
systems must be reviewed at least once every three months.2-2-2
Information System and Information Processing Facilities Protection 2-3
To ensure the protection of information systems and information processing facilities, 
(including workstations and infrastructures) against cyber risks.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-3-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
protecting critical systems and information processing facilities must include at least 
the following:
Whitelisting of application and software operation files that are allowed to 
execute on servers hosting critical systems.2-3-1-1
Protecting servers hosting critical systems using end-point protection solutions 
that are approved by the organization.2-3-1-2
Applying security patches and updates at least once every month for external 
and internet-connected critical systems and at least once every three months 
for internal critical systems, in line with the organization’s approved change 
managmenet mechanisms.2-3-1-3
Allocating specific workstations in an isolated network (Management Network), 
that is isolated from other networks or services (e.g., email service or internet), to 
be used by highly privileged accounts. 2-3-1-4  
Encrypting the network traffic of non-console administrative access for all 
technical components of critical systems using secure encryption algorithms 
and protocols.2-3-1-5
Reviewing critical systems’ configurations and hardening at least once every 
six months. 2-3-1-6
Reviewing and changing default configurations, and ensuring the removal of 
hard-coded, backdoor and/or default passwords, where applicable. 2-3-1-7
Protecting systems’ logs and critical files from unauthorized access, tampering, 
illegitimate modification and/or deletion.2-3-1-82-3-1
24
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteNetworks Security Management 2-4
To ensure the protection of the organization’s network from cyber risks. Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-5-3 , cybersecurity requirements of critical 
systems’ network security management must include at least the following:
Logically and/or physically segregating and isolating critical systems' networks. 2-4-1-1
Reviewing firewall rules and access lists, at least once every six months. 2-4-1-2 
Prohibiting direct connection between local network devices and critical systems, 
unless those devices are scanned to ensure they have security controls that meet 
the acceptable security levels for critical systems.2-4-1-3
Prohibiting critical systems from connecting to a wireless network. 2-4-1-4
Protecting against Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) at the network layer. 2-4-1-5
Prohibiting connection to the internet for critical systems that provide internal 
services to the organization and have no strong need to be accessed from 
outside the organization.2-4-1-6
Critical systems that provide services to a limited number of organizations (not 
individuals), shall use networks isolated from the Internet.2-4-1-7
Protecting against Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks to limit risks 
arising from these attacks.2-4-1-8
Allowing only whitelisting for critical systems’ firewall access lists. 2-4-1-92-4-1
Mobile Devices Security 2-5
To ensure the protection of mobile devices (including laptops, smartphones, tablets) from 
cyber risks and to ensure the secure handling of the organization’s information (including 
sensitive information) while utilizing Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) policy.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-6-3 , cybersecurity requirements for mobile 
devices security and BYOD in the organization must include at least the following: 
Prohibting access to critical systems from mobile devices except for a temporary 
period only, after assessing the risks and obtaining the necessary approvals from 
the cybersecurity function in the organization.2-5-1-1
Implementing full disk encryption for mobile devices with access to critical 
systems.2-5-1-22-5-1
Data and Information Protection 2-6
To Ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the organization’s data and  
information as per organizational policies and procedures, and related laws and regulations.Objective
25
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteControls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-7-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
protecting and handling data and information must include at least the following: 
Prohibting the use of critical systems’ data in any environment other than 
production environment, except after applying strict controls for protecting 
that data, such as: data masking or data scrambling techniques.2-6-1-1
Classifying all data within critical systems. 2-6-1-2
Protecting classified data of critical systems using data leakage prevention 
techniques.2-6-1-3
Identifying retention period for critical systems-associated data, in accordance 
with relevant legislations. Only required data must be retained in critical 
systems’ production environments. 2-6-1-4
Prohibting the transfer of any critical systems’ data from production environment 
to any other environment.2-6-1-52-6-1
Cryptography 2-7
To ensure the proper and efficient use of cryptography to protect information assets as 
per organizational policies and procedures, and related laws and regulations.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-8-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
cryptography must include at least the following: 
Encrypting all critical systems’ data-in-transit. 2-7-1-1  
Encrypting all critical systems’ data-at-rest at the level of files, database or 
certain columns within database.2-7-1-2
Using secure and up-to-date methods, algorithms, keys and devices in 
accordance with what NCA issues in this regard. 2-7-1-3  2-7-1
 Backup and Recovery Management 2-8
To ensure the protection of the organization’s data and information, including information 
systems and software configurations from cyber risks as per organizational policies and 
procedures, and related laws and regulations.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-9-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
backup and recovery management must include at least the following: 
Scope and coverage of online and offline backups shall cover all critical systems. 2-8-1-1
Performing backup within planned intervals, according to the organization’s 
risk assessment. NCA recommends performing backup for critical systems on 
a daily basis. 2-8-1-2
Securing access, storage and transfer of critical systems’ backups and storage 
media, and protecting it from destruction, unauthorized access or modification.2-8-1-32-8-1
26
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteWith reference to ECC subcontrol  2-9-3-3 , a periodical test must be conducted at least 
once every three months in order to determine the efficiency of recovering critical systems 
backups.2-8-2
Vulnerabilities Management 2-9
To ensure timely detection and effective remediation of technical vulnerabilities to prevent or 
minimize the probability of exploiting these vulnerabilities to launch cyber attacks against the 
organization.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control  2-10-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
technical vulnerabilities management of critical systems must include at least the following:
Utilizing trusted methods and tools for vulnerabilities assessments. 2-9-1-1
Assessing and remediating vulnerabilities (by installing security updates and 
patches) on technical components of critical systems at least once every month 
for external and internet-connected critical systems, and at least once every 
three months for internal critical systems.2-9-1-2  
Immediately remediating for critical vulnerabilities, in line with change 
management processes approved by the organization.2-9-1-32-9-1
With reference to ECC subcontrol 2-10-3-1 , vulnerabilities assessments must be conducted 
on critical systems’ technical components at least once every month.2-9-2
 Penetration Testing 2-10
To assess and evaluate the efficiency of the organization’s cybersecurity defense capabilities 
through simulated cyber attacks to discover unknown weaknesses within the technical 
infrastructure that may lead to a cyber breach. Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control  2-11-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
penetration testing on critical systems must include at least the following: 
Scope of penetration tests must cover all of the critical systems’ technical 
components and all its internal and external services. 2-10-1-1
Conducting penetration tests by a qualified team. 2-10-1-22-10-1
With reference to ECC subcontrol 2-11-3-2 , penetration tests must be conducted on critical 
systems at least once every six months. 2-10-2 
 Cybersecurity Event Logs and Monitoring Management 2-11
To ensure timely collection, analysis and monitoring of cybersecurity events for early 
detection of potential cyber-attacks in order to prevent or minimize the negative  impacts 
on the organization’s operations.Objective
27
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteControls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 2-12-3 , cybersecurity requirements for 
event logs and monitoring management for critical systems must include at least the 
following:
Activating cybersecurity event logs on all technical components of critical 
systems.2-11-1-1
Activating and monitoring of alerts and event logs related to file integrity 
management. 2-11-1-2
Monitoring and analyzing user behavior. 2-11-1-3 
Monitoring critical systems security events around the clock. 2-11-1-4
Maintaining and protecting critical systems security events logs. The log shall 
include all details (e.g., time, date, ID and affected system).2-11-1-52-11-1
With reference to ECC subcontrol 2-12-3-5 , retention period of cybersecurity’s critical 
systems event logs must be 18 months minimum, in accordance with relevant legislative 
and regulatory requirements.2-11-2
Web Application Security 2-12
To ensure the protection of Internet-Facing web applications against cyber risk. Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control  2-15-3 , cybersecurity requirements for external 
web applications for the organization’s critical systems must include at least the following: 
Secure session management, including session authenticity, session lockout 
and session timeout.2-12-1-1
Applying the minimum standards of Open Web Application Security Project 
(OWASP) Top Ten.2-12-1-22-12-1
With reference to ECC subcontrol 2-15-3-2 , multi-tier architecture principle, with mini -
mum 3 tiers, must be used.2-12-2
Application Security 2-13
To ensure the protection of the critical systems’ internal applications against cyber risks. Objective
Controls
Cybersecurity requirements for critical systems’ internal applications must be defined, 
documented, and approved.2-13-1
The cybersecurity requirements for critical systems’ internal applications must be 
implemented.2-13-2
28
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteThe cybersecurity requirements for critical systems’ internal applications must include at 
least the following:
Adopting multi-tier architecture principle, provided that number of tiers is not 
less than three. 2-13-3-1  
Using secure protocols (e.g., HTTPS). 2-13-3-2
Outlining the acceptable use policy for users. 2-13-3-3  
Secure session management, including session authenticity, session lockout 
and session timeout.2-13-3-42-13-3
The cybersecurity requirements for critical systems’ internal applications must be 
reviewed periodically. 2-13-4
29
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  White3  Cybersecurity Resilience
Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management (BCM) 3-1
To ensure the inclusion of the cybersecurity resiliency requirements within the organization’s 
business continuity management and to remediate and minimize the impacts on systems, 
information processing facilities and critical e-services from disasters caused by cybersecurity 
incidents.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 3-1-3 , cybersecurity requirements for business 
continuity management must include at least the following:
Establishing a disaster recovery center for critical systems. 3-1-1-1
Incorporating critical systems within disaster recovery plans. 3-1-1-2
Conducting periodical tests to ensure the efficiency of disaster recovery plans 
for critical systems, at least once annually.3-1-1-3  
NCA recommends conducting periodical live Disaster Recovery (DR) test for 
critical systems.3-1-1-43-1-1
30
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  White4Third-Party and Cloud Computing Cybersecurity
Third-Party Cybersecurity 4-1
To ensure the protection of assets against cybersecurity risks related to third parties, including 
outsourcing and managed services as per organizational policies and procedures, and related 
laws and regulations.Objective
Controls
In addition to the controls in ECC subdomain 4-1, cybersecurity requirements for contracts 
and agreements with third-parties must include at least the following:  
Screening or vetting of outsourcing and managed services companies and personnel 
who work on critical systems.4-1-1-1
Outsourcing and managed services of critical systems must rely on Saudi companies 
and organizations, in accordance with the relevant legislative and regulatory 
requirements.4-1-1-24-1-1
Cloud Computing and Hosting Cybersecurity 4-2
To ensure the proper and efficient remediation of cyber risks and the implementation of 
cybersecurity requirements related to hosting and cloud computing as per organizational 
policies and procedures, and related laws and regulations. It is also to ensure the protection 
of the organization’s information technology assets hosted on the cloud or processed/
managed by third parties.Objective
Controls
In addition to the subcontrols in ECC control 4-2-3 , cybersecurity requirements related to 
the use of hosting and cloud computing services must include at least the following: 
Hosting of critical systems and any part of their technical components must 
be inside the organization or within cloud computing services provided by 
government organizations or Saudi companies that are in compliance with NCA ’s 
Cloud Cybersecurity Controls (CCC), taking into account the classification of 
the hosted data. 4-2-1-14-2-1
31
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteAppendices
Appendix (A): Relationship between CSCC and ECC 
Critical Systems Cybersecurity Controls (CSCC – 1 : 2019) is an extension to Essential 
Cybersecurity Controls (ECC - 1 : 2018) as illustrated in figures (4) and (5) below, whereas 
the following items are added:
• New subdomain for critical systems cybersecurity controls. 
• Cybersecurity controls for critical systems are added to twenty subdomains.
There are no controls for critical systems cybersecurity are added for nine subdomains.
Subdomains for critical systems cybersecurity controls
Subdomains which critical systems controls are added
Subdomains which no critical systems controls are added
Figure (4): Guide to Colors of Subdomains in Figure (5)
32
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteCybersecurity Management Cybersecurity Strategy 1-1
1- Cybersecurity
GovernanceCybersecurity Roles and 
ResponsibilitiesCybersecurity Policies and Procedures
Cybersecurity in 
Information Technology 
Project Management1-3 Cybersecurity Risk Management 1-2
Periodical Cybersecurity 
Review and Audit1-4 Cybersecurity Regulatory Compliance
Cybersecurity Awareness and 
Training ProgramCybersecurity in Human Resources 1-5
Identity and Access 
Management2-2 Asset Management 2-1
2- Cybersecurity 
DefenseEmail ProtectionInformation System and Information 
Processing Facilities Protection2-3
Mobile Devices Security 2-5 Networks Security Management 2-4
Cryptography 2-7 Data and Information Protection 2-6
Vulnerabilities 
Management2-9 Backup and Recovery Management 2-8
Cybersecurity Event 
Logs and Monitoring 
Management2-11 Penetration Testing 2-10
Physical Security Cybersecurity Incident and Threat Management
Application Security 2-13 Web Application Security 2-12
Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management (BCM) 3-13- Cybersecurity
Resilience
Cloud Computing and 
Hosting Cybersecurity4-2 Third-Party Cybersecurity 4-14- Third-Party and 
Cloud Computing
Cybersecurity
Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Protection5-ICS
Cybersecurity
Figure (5): ECC and CSCC Subdomains
33
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteAppendix (B): Terms and Definitions
Table (2) below highlights some of the terms and definitions which were used in this 
document.
Table (2):  Terms and Definitions
Definition Term 
Set of commands, functions, objects and protocols developed to be used by 
programmers for developing software or interacting with other systems and/
or software.  Application Program 
Interface (API)
Vulnerabilities that if exploited could lead to unauthorized access to data or 
information or devices and systems.Critical Vulnerabilities
Inactive data stored in permanent storage media, such as: (Databases, 
archivals, tapes, off-site back up, laptops and Disks).Data-At-Rest
Data transmitted from one location to another, by any type of network; such 
as: Internet, private network, etc.Data-In-Transit
Methods to keep important data from unauthorized individuals and prevent 
its circulation outside the confines of the organization regardless of its form 
or location, whether it be stored at-rest, or in-use in user PCs or central 
servers or in-transit through a network.Data Leakage Prevention
 A technique based upon hiding part of the data to protect it by replacing 
some characters or values with certain symbols.Data Masking
A method that relies on rearranging or replacing data in a data set; so that 
the data values remain but are inconsistent with the original records and 
cannot be restored.  Data Scrambling
 An attempt to disable the system and make its services unavailable by 
sending many requests from more than one source at the same time.Distributed Denial of 
Service Attack (DDoS)
The actions and technology used for end-point protection against attcks, 
such as domains, computers and laptops (like anti-virus software, anti-
spyware progams, personal fire walls and intrusion detection systems.End-point Protection
The process of applying a one-way algorithm upon data in order to obtain 
a numerical value expressing such data so that it is difficult (or almost 
impossible) to return to the original data from the numerical value.Hashing Functions
The software that helps programs and databases (which may be on different 
host) work together.Middleware
Users gain entry from outside the internal network or internal information 
system.Remote Access
The process of verifying the identity of persons, prior to employment, due to 
their expected association with a task related to sensitive systems.Screening or Vetting
34
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteDefinition Term
A classification level applies to data that the unauthorized disclosure of 
which results in a severe damage to the national security, national economy, 
KSA ’s international relationships or the investigation of major crimes.Secret
Account used for operating services or software, with access to data and 
resources.Service Accounts
Set of commands and instructions written in one of programming languages. Source Code
A form of deliberately intense or thorough testing used to determine the 
stability of a given system or entity. It involves overwhelming its resources 
and testing beyond normal operational capacity, often to a breaking point, in 
order to observe the results. Stress Testing
A classification level applies to data that the unauthorized disclosure of 
which results in a severe damage to the national security, national economy 
or KSA ’s international relationships and it is hardly possible to recover from 
such a damage.Top Secret
Track, collect and analyze user data, and identify patterns of user activities; 
in order to detect harmful or unusual behaviors.User Behavior Analytics 
(UBA)
35
Document Classification: OpenCritical Systems Cybersecurity Controls Sharing Indicator:  WhiteAppendix (C): List of Abbreviations
Table (3) below shows some of the abbreviations and their meanings which are used in 
this document.
Table (3):  List of Abbreviations
Full Term Abb.
Advanced Persistent Threat APT
Application Program Interface  API
Business Continuity Management   BCM
Bring Your Own Device  BYOD
Critical National Infrastructure   CNI
Distributed Denial of Service DDoS
Essential Cybersecurity Controls ECC
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure HTTPS
Industrial Control System   ICS
Intrusion Detection System IDS
Intrusion Prevention System IPS
Multi-Factor Authentication  MFA
 Traffic Light Protocol TLP
User Behavior Analytics UBA
